UKB Converter (#589)
aramis-lab/clinica: docs/Converters/UKBtoBIDS.md

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->
# `ukb-to-bids` – Conversion of the UK Biobank (UKB) to BIDS

!!! quote "Description reproduced from the [UK Biobank webpage](https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/)"
    UK Biobank is a large-scale biomedical database and research resource, containing in-depth genetic and health information from half a million UK participants. The database is regularly augmented with additional data and is globally accessible to approved researchers undertaking vital research into the most common and life-threatening diseases. It is a major contributor to the advancement of modern medicine and treatment and has enabled several scientific discoveries that improve human health.

## Dependencies

If you installed the core of Clinica, this converter needs dcm2niix.

## Downloading UK Biobank

> The UK Biobank to BIDS converter requires the user to have applied to the data and to have downloaded the UK Biobank imaging and clinical data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UK Biobank to BIDS converter assumes that the user have already applied to get access to the data and that the imaging and clinical data have already been downloaded locally.
```

Reviewer 2: *has already applied

> Once you have access to it, the imaging data can be downloaded and extracted using this tutorial: https://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/~bbdatan/Accessing_UKB_data_v2.3.pdf, and the clinical data can be extracted using the information from this repository https://github.com/kenhanscombe/ukbtools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The imaging data can be downloaded and extracted using [this tutorial](https://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/~bbdatan/Accessing_UKB_data_v2.3.pdf). The clinical data can be extracted using the information from [this repository](https://github.com/kenhanscombe/ukbtools).
```

> Be careful, the clinical_data.tsv needs to contain these informations about the subject: sex, year of birth, age at recruitment, age at sessions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful, the file `clinical_data.tsv` needs to contain the following nformations about the subject: sex, year of birth, age at recruitment, age at sessions.
```

Reviewer 2: *information

## Supported modalities

Please note that this converter processes the following modalities : 
- T1W (nifti)
- T2 Flair (nifti)
- DWI (nifti)
- SWI (nifti)
- tfMRI (dicom)
- rsfMRI (dicom)

!!! Chosen files

>     Whenever possible, we use the rawest files so as to leave it to the user to choose the processing needed. When available we get the associated json.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Whenever is possible, the converter uses the rawest files found. This decision allows the user to choose the processing needed. When available the ocnverter get the associated json.
```

Reviewer 2: *converter

| Modality    | Chosen image(s) | Justification |
| :----------:|:---------------:|:-------:|

> | T1W                     | T1.nii.gz       | Defaced and cropped so there is no neck. The rawest image would be the simply defaced one, but since we have no interest in the neck we don't use it. We do not want any other corrections. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| T1W                     | T1.nii.gz       | Defaced and cropped so there is no neck. The rawest image would be the simply defaced one, but brain studies usually are not interested in the region of the neck. No other corrections are included. |
```

| T2 Flair    | T2_FLAIR.nii.gz | Defaced and cropped so there is no neck. The reasons for choosing this image are the same as for T1. |
| DWI         | AP/PAnii.gz     | It is the rawest images we can get. bvals and bvec are also available. |
| rsfMRI      | rsfMRI.dcm | Since the nii.gz version doesn't always include a json and in consideration for it's usage, we convert the dicom. |
| tfMRI       | tfMRI.dcm   | Same as rsfMRI.|

> | SWI         | SWI.nii.gz      | Combined coil version. We would get a rawer version, but dcm2niix has trouble handling the slices direction, so it is simpler to go with this version. Plus, swi is not fully integrated to bids so changes may be coming, hence a simple version for now. | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| SWI         | SWI.nii.gz      | Combined coil version. We would get a rawer version, but `dcm2niix` has trouble handling the slices direction, so it is simpler to go with this version. In addition, SWI modality is not fully integrated to BIDS specification and some changes may be coming. A simple version is available in the current version of this converter. | 
```

!!! quote "Description reproduced from the [UK Biobank webpage](https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/)"
    UK Biobank is a large-scale biomedical database and research resource, containing in-depth genetic and health information from half a million UK participants. The database is regularly augmented with additional data and is globally accessible to approved researchers undertaking vital research into the most common and life-threatening diseases. It is a major contributor to the advancement of modern medicine and treatment and has enabled several scientific discoveries that improve human health.

## Dependencies

If you installed the core of Clinica, this converter needs dcm2niix.

## Downloading UK Biobank

The UK Biobank to BIDS converter requires the user to have applied to the data and to have downloaded the UK Biobank imaging and clinical data.

Once you have access to it, the imaging data can be downloaded and extracted using this tutorial: https://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/~bbdatan/Accessing_UKB_data_v2.3.pdf, and the clinical data can be extracted using the information from this repository https://github.com/kenhanscombe/ukbtools.

> Be careful, the converter only takes in the nifti provided by UK Biobank, not the dicoms.

Reviewer 2: this part is no longer true based on the recent fmri efforts

Also, the clinical_data.tsv needs to contain these informations about the subject: sex, year of birth, age at recruitment, age at sessions.

## Supported modalities

Please note that this converter processes the following modalities : 
- T1W (nifti)
- T2 Flair (nifti)
- DWI (nifti)
- SWI (nifti)
- tfMRI (dicom)
- rsfMRI (dicom)

!!! Chosen files
    Whenever possible, we use the rawest files so as to leave it to the user to choose the processing needed. When available we get the associated json.
| Modality    | Chosen image(s) | Justification |
| :----------:|:---------------:|:-------:|
| T1W                     | T1.nii.gz       | Defaced and cropped so there is no neck. The rawest image would be the simply defaced one, but since we have no interest in the neck we don't use it. We do not want any other corrections. |
| T2 Flair    | T2_FLAIR.nii.gz | Defaced and cropped so there is no neck. The reasons for choosing this image are the same as for T1. |
| DWI         | AP/PAnii.gz     | It is the rawest images we can get. bvals and bvec are also available. |

> | rsfMRI      | rsfMRI.dcm | Since the nii.gz version doesn't always include a json and in consideration for it's usage, we convert the dicom. |

Reviewer 2: "in consideration for it's usage" sounds a bit awkward --> "The dicom sources are used to extract BIDS required metadata not found otherwise"

| tfMRI       | tfMRI.dcm   | Same as rsfMRI.|

> | SWI         | SWI.nii.gz      | Combined coil version. We would get a rawer version, but dcm2niix has trouble handling the slices direction, so it is simpler to go with this version. Plus, swi is not fully integrated to bids so changes may be coming, hence a simple version for now. | 

Reviewer 2: A bit too lengthy and informal --> "Combined coil version for dcm2niix compatibility."

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->
# `ukb-to-bids` – Conversion of the UK Biobank (UKB) to BIDS

!!! quote "Description reproduced from the [UK Biobank webpage](https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/)"
    UK Biobank is a large-scale biomedical database and research resource, containing in-depth genetic and health information from half a million UK participants. The database is regularly augmented with additional data and is globally accessible to approved researchers undertaking vital research into the most common and life-threatening diseases. It is a major contributor to the advancement of modern medicine and treatment and has enabled several scientific discoveries that improve human health

> 

Reviewer 2: missing .

## Dependencies

> If you installed the core of Clinica, this converter needs no further dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't it require dcm2niix?

Author: not right now since we take only the nifti as inputs.

## Downloading UK Biobank

> The UK Biobank to BIDS converter requires the user to have downloaded the UK Biobank imaging and clinical data.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't make much sense given the next sentence. Do you rather mean "requires the user to have registered"?

Once you have access to it, the imaging data can be downloaded and extracted using this tutorial: https://biobank.ctsu.ox.ac.uk/~bbdatan/Accessing_UKB_data_v2.3.pdf, and the clinical data can be extracted using the information from this repository https://github.com/kenhanscombe/ukbtools.

Be careful about two things: 

>     - the converter only takes in the nifti provided by UK Biobank, not the dicoms.

Reviewer 2: maybe add a note in parenthesis for `fmri`

>     - the converter will not work if you do not have among the clinical data the year of birth, the age at recruitment and at sessions and the sex of the subject.

Reviewer 2: This seems difficult for a user to check. Maybe just add this message as an error message in the code if we can not find them ?

Author: I think it is basic data to have (not required by bids but always required by any study). And not very hard to check either ! Do you still want me to add a message in the code ?

Reviewer 3: Let's place ourselves in the perspective of our users. First, they rarely reach for documentation *first*, only in case there is an issue (oftentimes) or when they are curious (sometimes). Second, imagine I run the converter on a datatset freshly downloaded from UKB and get a stack trace. Where do I get from here? Errors are usually for *exceptional* circumstances, not specific invariants that were not met that we deliberatly know of.

> the converter will not work if you do not have among the clinical data the year of birth, the age at recruitment and at sessions and the sex of the subject.

In my opinion, this is an invariant (or constraint) of our converter. Given any downloaded UKB datasets, we can determine whether these attributes are available as a validation step, prior to the conversion. So I'd expect a validation error with an appropriate message be thrown early in the execution, rather than a stack trace complaining of a missing `age` attribute in some DataFrame deep within the converter's logic.

Does it make sense to you?

## Supported modalities

Please note that this converter processes the following modalities : 
- T1W
- T2 Flair
- DWI
- SWI
- tfMRI
- rsfMRI

!!! Chosen files

>     Whenever possible, we use the rawest files in order not to impose opinions onto the user. When available we get the associated json.

Reviewer 2: "in order not to impose opinions" --> "so as to leave it to the user to choose the processing needed"

>     - T1W -> T1.nii.gz: cropped so there is no neck and defaced. The rawest image would be the simply defaced one, but since we have no interest in the neck we don't use it. We do not want any other corrections.

Reviewer 2: Have these as a table it'll be easier to read.

    - T2 Flair -> T2_FLAIR: cropped so there is no neck and defaced. The reasons for choosing this image are the same as for T1.
    - DWI -> AP.nii.gz/PA.nii.gz + bvals and bvecs. It is the rawest images we can get.
    - rsfMRI -> rfMRI.nii.gz
    - tfMRI -> tfMRI.nii.gz or dicom equivalent to get the json associated

>     - SWI -> SWI.nii.gz which is the combined coil version. We would get a rawer version, but dcm2niix seems to have trouble handling this format, so it is simpler to go with this version. Plus, swi is not fully integrated to bids so changes may be coming, hence a simple version for now.

Reviewer 2: "dcm2niix seems to have trouble handling this format" is too broad and unspecific. Reformulate.

    

## Using the converter

The converter can be run with the following command line:

```Text
clinica convert ukb-to-bids [OPTIONS] DATASET_DIRECTORY CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY BIDS_DIRECTORY 
```

where:

> - `DATASET_DIRECTORY` is the path to the original UK BIobank imaging directory, which content should look like:

Reviewer 2: "which content" --> "whose content"
